The board meetings in those days were held in the
old... Boardroom. Boardroom. Yeah, which was a
board, a board, yeah, was a wood building. That old
Victorian house north of Sabeasa. Yeah, it was
near the dining hall there, in that area, yeah, and
down the, well, you know where it was. In the era
before open meetings, by law, normally who from
Texas A&M, as in terms of people employed by A&M,
who normally went to the board meetings? Only who
Mr. Rutter invited and approved, to put it that
simply. He usually invited me to go because he had a
lot of things he had asked me to develop and he
didn't know thoroughly the background. But I
would sit in the corner. I wouldn't say a word until
he invited me to say something in the early days.
And of course there were no reporters there. No
faculty, no students, unless invited. No, the
only female was usually the secretary taking
notes, recording the minutes. Normally how long
did board meetings last? The usual pattern was
that they would come in the night before and would
be housed on campus and usually have a dinner.
Well, often Mr. Rudder would feed some drinking
place for them off campus, usually the country
club. And they would meet all, start, have
breakfast early, start very early, in modern
standards, about eight o'clock, definitely on
their way. And it would go usually all day, and
sometimes it would last two days. But usually it
was a full day meeting. They would usually get
through late, fairly late at night, 6.30 or so. Now
in the 60s, the board members came and went by
plane, They weren't coming by train, were they? It
varied with the person that would drive or be
driven by a chauffeur that would come here, and
some would come by plane. But as I recall, not too
many, well, until the university got its own
airplane. They used to fly some of the board
members in. Now that would be taboo, I guess,
knowing it. Let's see, kind of a trivia question.
Given the state laws at the time, were alcoholic
beverages ever served on campus for board events
in that era? Not to my knowledge, Haskell. Because
to my knowledge, it was always off campus. Oh,
yeah. If there was any alcoholic beverage at all.
In fact, well, I guess you probably know this. We
used to hide where the money came from to buy the
alcohol, the source of what we were buying,
really. Well, I wouldn't hide it, but the person
asked to do it would, was not to disclose where the
money came from or what it was for. Right. Now, when
I became dean of faculties, Buck Wirus called me
over that day and said, here is a $500 account at the
former student association, and if you need to
spend any money on anything for which you're not
supposed to spend state money, charge it to this
account. give us a receipt, and never, never,
never, even if it's a glass of wine, never charge
that to the state account. Charge that to the
student account. Right. And that happened even
before that, when Dick Hervey was the headed the
Former Students Association. He used to give Earl
about five times what he would allocate to me, but
he would allocate a sum to me. And we were told the
same story. And to buy things that we were not
supposed to use state money for. There were many
things we weren't. Now when the board members came
for a meeting here, they normally did not bring
their wives?
Not many did, to my knowledge. Because many of them
stayed right on the campus. And was Mrs. Cashin
still living there, taking care of the house, Red
Cashin's mother? She was initially, yeah.
because I knew that I've heard many of them say very
positive things about her thoughtfulness. Yeah.
Let's see. Mr. Rutter, during the 60s, Dr.
Harrington was the chancellor. And how did things
flow? On what basis did things go from President
Rutter to Chancellor Harrington? Did all matters
go to the board through the chancellor? Well,
initially before Earl came to be appointed as
president, first he was appointed academic, I
mean appointed vice president without
portfolio. And then he was, they all knew he was
going to be present, so it was announced shortly.
At that time, Dr. Harrington was both chancellor
and president of A&M College and chancellor of the
system. So after Mr. Rutter came, there was
initially a little jostling, I guess you'd put it
politely, of who had the call on what. But Mr.
Rutter initially was more than willing to bend
over backwards to try to get along with Tom and to
coordinate things for Tom. And they were fairly
compatible. I've seen others, chancellors and
presidents that weren't, but they were.
Anything about A&M University and later, when
after Mr. Murutter took over the services, the
Extension Service and Experiment Station and the
Engineering Extension Service and Experiment
Station and Transportation Institute, he was
very zealous that he had the input of what was going
to happen in those units. Initially, it was only
A&M College. But as president, he wanted the
services and the stations to report through the
president. In fact, he brought that about. That's
what I had heard. Oh, yes. Some of the board
members, just to be frank, I shouldn't sometimes
be candid as I am, but some of the board members at
the time thought that Chancellor Tom Harrington
was not active enough or aggressive enough in
pushing things for A&M. And they more or less
challenged Mr. Rutter to do that and eventually
gave him the responsibility for doing it. All
right. If you could organize – in this question, I
give you imperial power. How would you organize
the structure for the stations and the services?
Where would they report? I think they should be
under the campus university in which they're
housed. I'm not a strong believer in a strong
system arrangement. In fact, I'm not a strong
believer in a large system continually taking in
new institutions. It only dilutes the resources.
I can't imagine today that it helps Texas A&M at all
to have these others except perhaps for Prairie
View as members of the same organizational unit.
First of all, they're quite different. Most of
those others are primarily teaching
institutions. But Haskell, in the early days,
Prairie View thought that they were blood
brothers to A&M. Oh, no, I agree. To mostly the
agriculture relationships, and they weren't. I
agree. Very close relationships were had. That
one I understand. Let's see, the Tarleton, I mean,
excuse me, the Arlington giveaway, that occurred
after you left? Yes. No, no, no. That happens
during Rutter's regime and when I was here. Can you
review that, please?
Well, I frankly don't know all of the details, but
there was disagreements between Mr. Rutter and
some of the people there responsible. It wasn't
Wendell. No, no. It wasn't he, because he and Mr.
Rutter got along well. It was people on the
different boards, I think, were primarily
fighting. I'm not fully privy of all what
happened, but all I know is I agreed with Mr. Rudder
that it was a blessing to get rid of Arlington. They
gave it to the University of Texas. They wanted it.
And we got the Galveston campus about the same
time. How did that come about, the Galveston?
Well, primarily through the Moody family and
foundation and strong former students in this
area backing it. And I guess Babe Swartz probably
helped. Yes. That's one way we got Babe Swartz's
approval on other things by backing what he wanted
in the Galveston area. And you want to know how it
came about? Well, it was 100 acres donated to start
with on Pelican Island for it. which one of the
former students, a large multimillionaire
still, and the Moody family helped put up the
money. Mary Moody, Mary Northern Moody, was a very
strong proponent of Mr. Rudder. She liked him
immensely. She liked the military. Their dad was a
military person. And she was difficult to get
along with, but she really liked Mr. Rudder and
what he was doing. Now, I've heard a 99th-hand
report that one of the old forts, Coast Artillery
Forts, in the middle of the seawall, that property
was also offered to A&M. Do you remember anything?
Yeah, I believe so. And I can't recall offhand
exactly the reasons that they didn't follow
through on it. There was a reason.
You want to know also why Galveston was coveted and
wanted. Oceanography was being built up very
strong. probably had more impetus than any other
unit in A&M at the time. And they wanted an outlet to
the sea, naturally. Sure. And that's one reason we
started with the biological laboratory there,
Marine Biology Laboratory, which became then the
cadets, I mean the maritime people and all that,
and the actual campus being established. I was on
the board of visitors when they started. Yeah, I
was there for three years before I left A&M. All
right. Now, they're going to be celebrating their
50th anniversary very soon because John Calhoun
mentioned that to me the other day. I don't know
whether it's this fall or not, the creation of the
oceanography program here. It's hard to realize
it's been going that long.
Yeah.
changes, the modifications were making headway.
Do you remember any events that where he thought,
okay, we're making progress? Well, Mr. Rutter was
not a talkative or a euphoric person. He confided
in few people about his feelings about anything.
But, uh, Sounds like I'm bragging, but I think I was
closer to him. He confided more in me than he did in
anybody else on the campus, including his own
wife, which I shouldn't say. She would confirm.
She'd tell you the same thing. You bet. I had a good
interview with her the other day, and she was
saying that she didn't know much of anything that
happened at the office. Oh, well, her kids will
tell you they didn't. Mr. Rutter never brought
anything home. We never discussed university
business. All right, so he shared some things with
you. Who else did he share feelings,
frustrations, joys with? Do you know? Yeah, in
some things with Tiger Teague, because they were
pretty close.
They were cut from the same cloth, too. Tiger was
just as aggressive as Earl Rudder was, and very
capable, and they respected each other. Yeah, and
Maggie McGee is probably one other that I recall
that he would confide some in. But he knew these
people would never mention it. was never in any
danger of anything he told Tiger or Maggie.
They're the two that are outside the university
that I think he probably confided in the most. Do
you remember any examples of Washington help
where Mr. Teague's role was very, very
significant? Oh, yeah. There's probably dozens
of examples, Haskell. You can name three or four or
five of the major buildings on the campus that came
from Tiger Teague's intercession, along with the
other politicians, of course, LBJ being
president and so forth. I know in the 70s, Mr.
Teague got a rider on the Veterans Appropriation
Bill to link medical schools with VA hospitals.
And he was also very helpful in us acquiring what
used to be called Bryan Air Force Base. Oh, I hadn't
thought of that, yes. Yeah, well, there was a lot of
entanglement that had to be unraveled at the
federal level, and it wasn't just the state
matters taking it over. It had to be settled at the
federal level, and Tiger carried that ball. And he
carried the ball on anything Earl Rutter asked him
to do, he would follow through. Do you remember
anything that Mr. Teague turned down, whether it
came about or not?
No, I can't write. directly say that. I know, like
Earl, initially he was opposed to coeducation and
dropping or deemphasizing military. He thought
we were deemphasizing it.
On the racial integration, I've never heard any
negative. Do you remember anybody being contrary
to that? To being integrated? No. As surprising as
it might sound to outsiders, not to you and I,
people were more opposed to coeducation and women
and dropping the emphasis on military, and they
were on accepting the blacks. In fact, I remember
board members that I attended in the early days
saying, We've got to bring the blacks in. They're
the great football players. A&M's going to be
great. And oh, Paul Bear Bryant used to emphasize
that to Mr. Ruddard. I can remember what Mr.
Ruddard turned to him. He said, Mr. Bryant, girls
don't play football.
He says, yes, but I'm going to get a lot of good
players here because they can come here.
I remember hearing Mr. Heaton speak negatively
about integration, but as I understand it, Mr.
Rudder told Mr. Heaton to review all the
transcripts. those first armed military
personnel now did is it correct that mr. Rutter
contacted the Pentagon and said send some black
armed services members when you send this year's
group to begin summer school include some black He
probably did, knowing Mr. Rudder, but I can't
vouch for that Haskell, because he handled that
type of matter. He and Dean Hannigan handled most
of that. I wasn't involved directly in that type of
thing. He knew that I was favored not only
co-education, but integration, too.
Integration came about much easier than most of
these other things. Of course, people may not say
that now, but it did. Do you remember any proposals
that Mr. Rutter came forth that at first you were
hesitant about, but he persuaded you to change
your mind?
No, I can't, because most of my involvement was in
the academic research area.
And I cannot honestly say that he ever turned down
anything that I thought we should be doing in those
areas. In the other areas of leadership and
administration, It was not his normal tendency to
consult other people about this. He did it, and
then you were told about it. That's what I
understood. And I'm assuming that on research, he
didn't claim to be highly knowledgeable. Oh, no,
no. Margaret will tell you this herself, but he
never made any claim to be even an academic. She
used to say how he used to tell her how fortunate he
was to get some good academic people to run the
place for him. Because I know we faculty members,
when he would speak, say, to the arts and sciences
faculty, we never accused him of trying to pose as
an academic or anything like that. No, you know, he
got an honorary doctorate from Baylor. I remember
that. Yeah, but he never used it or never insisted
on anybody calling him. I never remember anything
about Dr. Earl Rudder after that. I used to tell him
kind of in jest, I said, don't make any play out of
that doctorate, because most doctor degrees
don't mean a pinch of shit. That's right. All
right. Do you remember any humorous incidents
where something just went wrong, something
fizzled out, something— Yeah, there's a couple of
anecdotes. I'm going to tell you one. There was a
former student who was on the faculty He was caught
out on what was then the old Aggie Experiment
Station building, making out with one of the
secretaries. And he was hauled in to Mr. Rutter for
chastisement and discipline. And Mr. Rutter, I
wasn't present, but he told me immediately
afterward, was laughing as much as I'd ever heard
him laugh. He said, I called that guy in, and I said,
damn it, X. He said, as a former student, I thought
you would have more sense, if you're going to do
this, to get off the campus. And he says, if I ever
catch you doing it again, I'll kick your ass all the
way to Austin. What were Mr. Rudder's real
dislikes? Was there something that those of you
who worked with him closely knew not to do? Well, as
I've said in this account that I wrote up, there was
two things that I learned early and I was not to
press or to discuss too much with Mr. Reuter. First
was what he ate or wanted to eat, and second half
what his health was. These were taboo areas as far
as I was concerned. There were other things too. He
had a good sense of humor. Oh yeah, he had a sense of
humor. What time did his work day normally begin?
What time did he get to the office? In the early
days, he would get there quite early, often before
8 o'clock, maybe 7.30, but towards the last of his
tenure, it slipped more and more. I think it was the
way he was feeling mostly. In the early days, he
came back after supper? Oh, we never went home
until we got the job done. We stayed there until it
was 9.30 at night. Oh, in the early days, Dorsey and
I would collect in his office every night as a
ritual. It wasn't a daytime activity, it was a
nighttime activity, and we would discuss all the
plans and things that he had encountered during
the day and he wanted solutions to, and on and on.
Let's see, Dean Hannigan was appointed dean of
students while you were in the administration,
wasn't he? Yeah.
Oh, I don't recall exactly, but it was in the second
or third year after I was appointed by Mr. Rutter.
Now, how did Mr. Rutter identify him? He brought
him in on his own. As you know, he was a former
military officer. Did he know him? He had known
him. I guess he didn't work with him, but he had
known him through some contacts, and it was highly
recommended by others. No, I had nothing to do with
bringing Dean Hannigan here. That was strictly
Mr. Rutter and his own input through the military
circle.
In your own work, when you went over to become an
administrator, your laboratory work ceased. Is
that right? Or did you continue? Essentially,
I was made chairman of the department. before I was
in higher administration in the School of
Agriculture to run the Department of Plant
Physiology and Pathology, which later became
called Plant Sciences. During that tenure, one of
the first things, Mr. Rutter had just come in in
1958. It was through his intercession that we got
the Plant Science building. Askey told him what I
wanted done was a new plant science building, and
it came about, even though he wasn't officially
the president at that time.
Even though I had an office and a laboratory in the
plant science building, I never used it much
except to meet with the graduate students that I
was finishing up. I soon learned that you couldn't
wear three hats. You couldn't be a good
administrator and be a good faculty member, too,
even though Mr. Rutter kept telling me that I could
do all of that stuff. In fact, that's the way he
convinced me to go into administration, saying,
oh, you can still do research. You can still teach.
Oh, yeah, just like administration was a side
issue, like hell it was. Now, in your teaching
days, how many doctoral students did you direct?
Do you remember?
I don't remember exactly, but both master's
degree and doctorate, they were well over 60,
between 60 and 75. I think the doctorates were
about 23, as I recall. I could look it up if you need
to know. The research that you did on cotton, you
started that after you got down here? Oh, yeah, I'd
never seen it. Well, I'd seen a cotton plant in the
greenhouse, but I didn't know anything about
cotton, no. I was from the Middle West. That's what
I thought. It was corn or wheat or cattle, yeah,
sure. All right, now, what was your primary crop,
research crop in Kentucky? Well, the Little Eye
tobacco was the main research crop there at the
university and on the experiment station. But I
wasn't there long enough to really get involved. I
did some minor research and consultation on the
tobacco, but I was working mostly on the origin of
ethylene in plants. And if anything that was
associated, I thought, well, that I would work
with. I was employed internally as a teacher. I
didn't have any research appointment in
Kentucky. I did research, but I didn't have any
appointment. When you got down here, how long did
it take you to jump into the cotton? One year. When I
came, Dr. Lewis, R.D. Lewis, director of the Ag
Experiment Station. In my initial meeting with
him, I promised he would get me a 25% appointment. I
asked him for it the first year, and he said he
couldn't bring it about because things were
tough, hard up at that time. But the second year, he
came through on his agreement. Describe Dr. Lewis
and his role at Texas A&M. Well, Dr. Lewis, like
many of the early A&M leaders, was a no-nonsense
man. He was strictly business, but that doesn't
mean that he was mechanical or anything like that.
He was a caring person too, but he expected you to do
your job and to do it right. And if you didn't, then
you caught hell from him. He and I got along quite
well because Well, one reason, his son was in my
class that I taught in the first year I was here, and
his son went home and told his dad, Wayne Hall's a
hell of a good teacher. That's what he told me
later. Very good. Now, he had not, Lewis had not,
he's not a native Texan. No, he came here from Ohio,
and I believe he was from Ohio originally, or maybe
it was Missouri. It was one of the Midwest states. I
don't know, but I think it was the Midwest. And I
remember on the Aspirations Committee, he seemed
to me to have clear foresight. he could see a broad
horizon. Can I take a brief? Missed
opportunities. Well, to start with Haskell, I've
never been one to moan missed opportunities in my
past. I know there's things that escape me and
didn't turn out right and probably should have
been done differently, but I'm not one to. But are
there any that A&M missed? Any doors that were open
that we didn't realize it and now we realize they
were? I
think we could have brought about some of the
things faster than we accomplished.
But it's a matter of building. And as you know,
universities are not built up, even though they
are built up and their reputation lags their real
estate. Do you remember any great scholars that we
almost got? Oh, yeah, there's dozens of those in
those early days. One thing Mr. Rutter gave me as an
assignment was to bring in some outstanding
faculty, and he was willing to see that we provided
he and the board members money. For a reasonable
number, not a limited course. Oh, yeah, I remember
going with Andy Suttle, for example, out on the
West Coast, and we met with five different Nobel
laureates. We were trying to entice coming in a
couple that Andy had known at the University of
Chicago, namely Dr. Libby, who was his mentor, and
the famous chemist. His name slips me right now,
but anyway. We almost got one or two of them to come
here, but we missed out. You were asking about
disappointments. That was one of my... What more
could we have done in hindsight to have... I don't
think because at that time A&M's reputation, even
though we liked to pat ourselves on the back and say
we were always great, at that time it really wasn't
attractive to a lot of people unless they could see
really a challenge to do something. The reason I
was able to entice Dean Zehner and Dean Horace
Byers to come here was to convince them that they'd
done about all they could do at their present
institutions, were well recognized, but here
they could do something that couldn't be done
elsewhere. That's one reason. But that story
didn't carry with the Nobel laureates in the
earlier days.
Who identified chemistry and economics to get
special emphasis? I think that, well, I hesitate
to say that I did it alone, but I was the impetus for
Flint. Mr. Rutter gave me almost unlimited
authority to establish priorities and do things
in the academic area and the research area within
reason. Of course, I was always consulting with
him before final approval. I remember talking to
Mel Greenhut after years later. I talked Mel
Greenhut into coming here, yeah. Did you? Sure
did. Now how did you identify him? Through the
department chairman of Grice, who you might have
known. Did you? Don't recall his name. I was trying
to recall his name. He came here, and Mel tried to
get him to come here later. Oh, okay. But the real
thing, besides getting Mel as chairman, was
getting the Michigan State group as a team to come.
We got four of them to come at once. Literally
looted their department there. We paid,
supposedly in those days, pretty good salaries.
Now, and that...